Documentation: How to prepare svg and yaml files for the website (#87)
echemdb/svgdigitizer: doc/workflow.md

# Digitizing CVs for echemdb

> This step by step tutorial explains how to digitize cyclic voltammograms from research papers for the [echemdb/website](https://github.com/echemdb/website) project. An example plot of such a curve is provided in Figure 2a in the [publication example](files/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.pdf). 

Reviewer: I think we are not far from also digitizing differential capacitance plots which are still closely related with cyclic voltammograms and certainly relevant for the website. It is not completely general. Maybe I didn't make myself clear enough.

> This step by step tutorial explains how to digitize cyclic voltammograms from research papers for the [echemdb/website](https://github.com/echemdb/website) project. An example plot of such a curve is provided in Figure 2a in the [publication example](files/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.pdf). 

Author: You are right. In principle, the `cv` module can be used for plots with similar requirements. 

I guess we need at some point an overview page with different plots and a link to the proper module to use. Something like the [matplotlib gallery](https://matplotlib.org/stable/gallery/index.html)

Can we find something better than "two dimensional plots". Something like "...digitize specific plots found in the field if electrochemistry. In this example a cyclic voltammogram is digitized. Other supported plots are illustrated elsewhere."

   Click on individual nodes and adjust the handles such that the path matches the curve in the plot. Eventually adjust the position of the nodes. Do this for each node until you are satisfied with the result.

   ![inkscape_smoothed_path](files/images/inkscape_smoothed_path.png)

5. Add a text field next and name it `curve: identifier`, which in our case would be `curve: blue`.

6. Group the text field and the curve.

![inkscape_smoothed_path_curve](files/images/inkscape_smoothed_path_curve.png)

7. Add a text field to the plot containing the scan rate, with which the data was acquired. This is not necessarily given in the plot or figure description and might have to extracted from the text of the manuscript: `scan rate: 50 mV / s`.

The final file should look like this:

![inkscape_final](files/images/inkscape_final.png)

## Step 4: Create a metadata file for each digitized curve

Create a YAML file with the same name than the SVG file:`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1_p0_2b_blue.yaml`

> 

Author: ```suggestion

The general structure of the yaml file for the website is provided [echemdb/electrochemistry-metadata-schema](https://github.com/echemdb/electrochemistry-metadata-schema/blob/main/examples/Author_YYYY_FirstTitleWord_Page_fignr_identifier.yaml)

```

# Digitizing plots for echemdb

> This step by step tutorial explains how to digitize plots commonly found in electrochemical research papers (e.g. cyclic voltammograms) for the [echemdb/website](https://github.com/echemdb/website) project. In this example a cyclic voltammogram is digitized. A plot is provided in Figure 2a in the [publication example](files/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.pdf). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This step by step tutorial explains how to digitize plots commonly found in electrochemical research papers (e.g. cyclic voltammograms) for the [echemdb/website](https://github.com/echemdb/website) project. In this example a cyclic voltammogram is digitized. A plot is provided in Figure 2a in the {download}`./files/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.pdf  <publication example>`. 
```

> This step by step tutorial explains how to digitize plots commonly found in electrochemical research papers, e.g., cyclic voltammograms, for the [echemdb/website](https://github.com/echemdb/website) project. In this example a cyclic voltammogram is digitized. A plot is provided in Figure 2a in the <a href="./files/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.pdf" download>publication example</a>.

Reviewer 2: I would strongly recommend against inline HTML as this will likely cause trouble down the road (e.g., with styling or with any other processing by Sphinx.)

I'll have a look what can be done instead.

 **2: Trace the curve**

1. Open the SVG file.

3. Mark two positions one for each axis (x and y). The first position on the x-axis will be 0.0 V vs RHE. Add a text label which contains `x1: 0.0 V vs RHE`. Draw a line from connecting the text label and the position on the x-axis. Finally group the line and the text label. Repeat this for positions `x2`, `y1` and `y2`.

   ![inkscape_x1_label](files/images/inkscape_x1_label.png)

   **Some notes on labels:**

   **TODO #86:** Add link to possible typos.

   * In principle the units have to be provided only on the `x2` and `y2` position. 
   * $\mu$ can be used, but it is more convenient to use `u`instead.
   * $^{-2}$ can be written as `-2`
   * The reference on the voltage axis is not always given in the plot. Extract this information from the manuscript text.

   When all axes have been marked the plot looks like the following:

   ![inkscape_all_labels](files/images/inkscape_all_labels.png)

> 4. Roughly trace the blue curve by selecting the the tool `Draw Bezier curves` ![inkscape_draw_Bezier](./files/images/inkscape_draw_Bezier.png)and select the mode `Create regular Bezier path`![inkscape_Bezier_mode](./files/images/inkscape_Bezier_mode.png).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Roughly trace the blue curve by selecting the the tool `Draw Bezier curves` ![inkscape_draw_Bezier](./files/images/inkscape_draw_Bezier.png) and select the mode `Create regular Bezier path`![inkscape_Bezier_mode](./files/images/inkscape_Bezier_mode.png).
```

> # Tracing CVs with Inkscape from publication for the echemdb.website

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Digitizing CVs for echemdb
```

> The cyclic voltammogram we trace is provided in Figure 2a in the [publication example](publication_example.pdf) and looks as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The cyclic voltammogram we trace is provided in Figure 2a in the [publication example](publication_example.pdf):
```

[<img src="sample_data_2.png" width="450"/>](sample_data_2.png)

> ## Step 1: pdf, bib and metadata file preparation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Step 1: Prepare pdf, bib and metadata file
```

> **1: Create a folder with the pdf, where the folder name is:**
> 
> `FirstAuthorName_Year_FirstTitleWord_FirstPageNr`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**1: Create a new directory:**

The directory should be named `FirstAuthorName_Year_FirstTitleWord_FirstPageNr`
```

For the example pdf this comes down to

`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1`

> The Page number should be the page number in the published pdf. Since the example is not published the page number is `1`. In other cases this could be `1021`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The page number should be the page number in the published pdf. Since the example is not published the page number is `1`. In other cases this could be `1021`.
```

> The pdf should be named according to the same scheme:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Put the publication pdf in the newly created directory. The pdf should be named according to the same scheme:
```

`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.pdf`

**2: Place a bib file in the folder.**

> The most simple approach is to search the article with [Google Scholar](http://scholar.google.com/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The easiest approach is to search for the article with [Google Scholar](http://scholar.google.com/).
```

> Modify the scholar settings that a bibtex link appears below the citation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modify the scholar settings so that a BibTeX link appears below the citation:
```

Click on the 3 lines next to the Google Scholar logo

![./files/images/scholar_options.png](files/images/scholar_options.png)

Choose Settings

![./files/images/scholar_options_selection.png](files/images/scholar_options_selection.png)

> Select `Show links to import citatons into BibTex"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Select `Show links to import citatons into BibTeX"
```

![./files/images/scholar_options_bibtex.png](files/images/scholar_options_bibtex.png)

> An `import into BbTex` link appears below the linked article:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An `import into BibTeX` link appears below the linked article:
```

![./files/images/scholar_options_bibtex_link.png](files/images/scholar_options_bibtex_link.png)

Download the bib file or save the content to a file named:

`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.bib`

Open the file and change the key, such that it matches the folder name:

![./files/images/bibtex_key.png](./files/images/bibtex_key.png)  

> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> **Finally the folder should now contain the following files:**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**The folder should now contain the following files:**
```

`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.bib`

`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.pdf`

> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Step 2: Prepare svg and png files from the pdf

> Install the `svgdigitizer`.

Reviewer 2: We should link to some installation instructions here. If we do not have any, we should probably add a TODO + Issue for this.

In a shell use `svgdigitizer paginate mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1.pdf` to create for each page of the pdf an `svg` and a `png` file in the same folder.

> The filenames look as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The filenames are of the form:
```

`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1_p0.png`

`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1_p0.svg`

> **Note:** The page count starts from 0. It also does not reflect the original page number in the pdf.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** The page count starts from 0. It does not reflect the original page number in the pdf.
```

> ## Step 4: Digitize a plot

Reviewer 2: There is no step 3?

Author: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Digitize a plot
```

**1: Select an svg file with a plot to be digitized**

For this example we use inkscape to digitize some data in plot 2a in the pdf, which is is located on page two of the manuscript (filename containing `_p1`). The plot contains three curves, which can be identified by their colors. Preferably each digitized curve should be placed in a single svg file. Therefore, create a copy of the svg file of page two (`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1_p1.svg`) and rename it to`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1_p0_2b_blue.svg`, to indicate that this files contains the digitized curve of the blue curve in Figure 2a on page 2. 

>  **2: Select the curve in the svg file**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 **2: Trace the curve**
```

1. Open the svg file.

> 2. Click on the image of the pdf page, select `Object properties`, select `Lock` and press `Set`. This prevents the user from moving the image around in the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Click on the image of the pdf page, select `Object properties`, select `Lock` and press `Set`. This prevents the user from moving the image.
```

   ![inkscape_object_properties](files/images/inkscape_object_properties.png)

   ![inkscape_object_properties_selection](files/images/inkscape_object_properties_selection.png)

> 3. Select two positions on for each axis (x and y). The first position on the x-axis will be 0.0 V vs RHE. Add a textlabel which contains `x1: 0.0 V vs RHE`. Draw a line from connecting the textlabel and the position on the x-axis. Finally group the line and the textlabel. Repeat this for positions `x2`, `y1` and `y2`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Mark two positions one for each axis (x and y). The first position on the x-axis will be 0.0 V vs RHE. Add a text label which contains `x1: 0.0 V vs RHE`. Draw a line from connecting the text label and the position on the x-axis. Finally group the line and the text label. Repeat this for positions `x2`, `y1` and `y2`.
```

   ![inkscape_x1_label](files/images/inkscape_x1_label.png)

   **Some notes on labels:**

   * In principle the units have to be provided only on the `x2` and `y2` position. 
   * $\mu$ can be used, but it is more convenient to use `u`instead.
   * $^{-2}$ can be written as `-2`
   * The reference on the voltage axis is not always given in the plot. Extract this information from the manuscript text.

> 
>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>    When all positions are selected the plot looks like the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   When all axes have been marked the plot looks like the following:
```

   ![inkscape_all_labels](files/images/inkscape_all_labels.png)

> 4. Roughly trace the blue curve with a spline by selecting the the tool `Draw Bezier curves` ![inkscape_draw_Bezier](./files/images/inkscape_draw_Bezier.png)and select the mode `Create regular Bezier path`![inkscape_Bezier_mode](./files/images/inkscape_Bezier_mode.png).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Roughly trace the blue curve by selecting the the tool `Draw Bezier curves` ![inkscape_draw_Bezier](./files/images/inkscape_draw_Bezier.png)and select the mode `Create regular Bezier path`![inkscape_Bezier_mode](./files/images/inkscape_Bezier_mode.png).
```

   

   ![inkscape_rough_select](./files/images/inkscape_rough_select.png)

>    Select the curve, select the tool `Edit paths by node`![inkscape_edit_paths_by_node](./files/images/inkscape_edit_paths_by_node.png), and sleect all nodes by pressing `CTR-a`. Click on the option `make sleected nodes smooth`![inkscape_node_options](./files/images/inkscape_node_options.png).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Select the curve, select the tool `Edit paths by node`![inkscape_edit_paths_by_node](./files/images/inkscape_edit_paths_by_node.png), and select all nodes by pressing `CTRL-a`. Click on the option `make selected nodes smooth`![inkscape_node_options](./files/images/inkscape_node_options.png).
```

>    Click on individual nodes and adjust the handles, such that the path matches the curve in the plot. Eventually adjust the position of the nodes. Do this for each node until you are satisfied with the result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Click on individual nodes and adjust the handles such that the path matches the curve in the plot. Eventually adjust the position of the nodes. Do this for each node until you are satisfied with the result.
```

   ![inkscape_smoothed_path](files/images/inkscape_smoothed_path.png)

> 
>    
> 
>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 5. Add a textfield next to the spline and name it `curve: identifier`, which in our case would be `curve: blue`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Add a text field next and name it `curve: identifier`, which in our case would be `curve: blue`.
```

> 6. Group the textfield and the spline

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Group the text field and the curve.
```

![inkscape_smoothed_path_curve](files/images/inkscape_smoothed_path_curve.png)

> 7. Add a textfield to the plot containing the scan rate, with which the data was acquired. This is not necessarily given in the plot or figure description and might have to extracted from the text fo the manuscript. `scan rate: 50 mV / s` or `rate: 50 mV / s`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Add a text field to the plot containing the scan rate, with which the data was acquired. This is not necessarily given in the plot or figure description and might have to extracted from the text of the manuscript: `scan rate: 50 mV / s`.
```

The final file should look like this:

![inkscape_final](files/images/inkscape_final.png)

> 8
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ## Step 3: Create a metadata file for each digitized curve

Reviewer 2: Step 3 comes after step 4.

Create a yaml file with the same name than the svg file:`mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1_p0_2b_blue.yaml`

**TODO:** Templates for various systems can be found in the examples section of the [electrochemistry-metdadata-schema](https://github.com/echemdb/electrochemistry-metadata-schema). The example yaml file for the example plot is located [here](./files/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1_p1_2a_blue.yaml).

Adjust all keys in the fle according to the content of the research article.

> ## Step 4: Upload to website

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Step 5: Submit to echemdb
```

> Place the folder in website/Literature and create a pull request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Propose a pull request that adds your directory to `website/literature`, e.g., by uploading the YAML and SVG files you created at https://github.com/echemdb/website/upload/main/literature/mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1
```

## Notes

> If you want to test if your file is working, use the function 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to test whether your files were prepared correctly for echemdb, run:
```

`svgdigitize cv mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1_p0_2b_blue.svg --metadata mustermann_2021_svgdigitizer_1_p0_2b_blue.yaml --package`

> This provides a csv with the data of the plot and a json package file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This creates a CSV with the data of the plot and a JSON package file that you can inspect to verify that the data has been correctly extracted.
```

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
